334 docs rfc create the docs for tigerlake (#4194)
timescale/docs: use-timescale/tigerlake.md

---
title: Integrate data lakes with Tiger Cloud
excerpt: Unifies the Tiger Cloud operational architecture with data lake architectures. This enables real-time application building alongside efficient data pipeline management within a single system.
products: [cloud]
price_plans: [scale, enterprise]
keywords: [data lake, lakehouse, s3, iceberg]
---

import IntegrationPrereqsCloud from "versionContent/_partials/_integration-prereqs-cloud-only.mdx";

# Integrate data lakes with $CLOUD_LONG

$LAKE_LONG unifies the $CLOUD_LONG operational architecture with data lake architectures. $LAKE_LONG enables you to build 
real-time applications alongside efficient data pipeline management within a single system.

> This experimental release is a native integration enabling continuous replication between managed Iceberg and catalog 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This early access release is a native integration enabling synchronization between a managed Timescale database instance and Iceberg tables
```

Author: Done

running in AWS [S3 Tables][s3-tables] in your AWS account and relational tables and $HYPERTABLEs in $CLOUD_LONG. 

## Prerequisites

<IntegrationPrereqsCloud/>

## Integrate a data lake with your $SERVICE_LONG

To connect a $SERVICE_LONG to the AWS S3 Tables that make up your data lake, you need the following:

> - The ARN of the data lake table bucket

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The ARN of the S3Table bucket
```

             }
           ]
         }
         ```
   1. Replace `<S3TABLE_BUCKET_ARN>` with the `Amazon Resource Name (ARN)` for the table bucket you just created.
   1. Click `Next`, then give the inline policy a name and click `Create policy`.

   Provide $COMPANY with the ARN of this role, the ARN of the S3 table bucket.
  $COMPANY uses the outputs to spin up your $LAKE_LONG services, then let you know when the $SERVICE_SHORT is 
  ready to use. Provisioning takes a couple of minutes, during this time the $SERVICE_SHORT is restarted.

</Procedure>

</Tab>

</Tabs>

## Stream data from your $SERVICE_LONG to your data lake

To stream data from a $PG relational table, or a $HYPERTABLE in your $SERVICE_LONG to your data lake, run the following 
statement:

```sql
ALTER TABLE <table_name> SET (
  tigerlake.iceberg_sync = true | false,
  tigerlake.iceberg_partitionby = '<partition_specification>'
)
```

* `tigerlake.iceberg_sync`: `boolean`, set to `true` to start streaming, or `false` to stop the stream. A stream 
  **cannot** resume after being stopped. 
* `tigerlake.iceberg_partitionby`: optional property to define a partition specification in Iceberg. By default the 

>   partitioning specification of the $HYPERTABLE is used. Streamed $PG tables can have a partition specification 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the Iceberg table is partitioned as day(<time-column of $HYPERTABLE>). This default behavior is applicable only to hypertables. 
```

  for the Iceberg table, if intentially defined. Please refer to [partitioning](#partitioning) for more details.

Only tables or $HYPERTABLEs with primary keys are supported, this includes composite primary keys as well. 
A primary key is necessary for Iceberg to perform update or delete statements.

When a stream is started, the full table is synchronized to Iceberg, this means that all prior records are imported first.
The write throughput is ranging at approximately 40.000 records / second, for larger tables a full import can take some time.

### Partitioning

> By default, the partition interval for an Iceberg table is the same as the one from a $HYPERTABLE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the partition interval for an Iceberg table is day(time-column) for a $HYPERTABLE, 
```

> The sync of a Postgres table does not enable any partitioning in Iceberg, but can be set through the [API](#api) with `tigerlake.iceberg_partitionby`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sync of a Postgres table does not enable any partitioning in Iceberg for non-hypertables, but can be set through the [API](#api) with `tigerlake.iceberg_partitionby`.
```

The following partition intervals and specifications are supported, and the define behavior of [Iceberg partition specification][iceberg-partition-spec].

> 

Reviewer: Please remove the result-type column here.

Author: Done

| Interval      | Description | Source types | Result type |
| ------------- | --- | --- | --- |

> | `hour`        | Extract a date or timestamp day, as days from 1970-01-01 | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz` | `int` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `hour`        | Extract a date or timestam as hours since epoch | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz` |
```

> | `day`         | Extract a date or timestamp day, as days from 1970-01-01 | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz` | `int` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `day`         | Extract a date or timestamp day, as days since epoch | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz` | 
```

> | `month`       | Extract a date or timestamp day, as days from 1970-01-01 | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz` | `int` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `month`       | Extract a date or timestamp day, as months since epoch | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz` |
```

> | `year`        | Extract a date or timestamp day, as days from 1970-01-01 | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz` | `int` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `year`        | Extract a date or timestamp as years since epoch | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz` | 
```

> | `truncate[W]` | Value truncated to width W, see [options][iceberg-truncate-options] | `int`, `long`, `decimal`, `string`, `binary` | `int` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `truncate[W]` | Value truncated to width W, see [options][iceberg-truncate-options] | `integer`, `smallint`, `bigint` || 
```

Reviewer: The types information is missing for truncate.

> 

Reviewer: I think it is good to add a section with examples here:

```suggestion
##Examples
This SQL enables iceberg sync on my_hypertable and sets up a daily partitioning scheme on the hypertable’s time column.  (i.e. equivalent to “day(ts_column)” ). 

ALTER TABLE my_hypertable SET (tigerlake.iceberg_sync = true)

You can explicitly specify the partitioning scheme using:

ALTER TABLE my_hypertable SET (tigerlake.iceberg_sync = true,
                                                          tigerlake.iceberg_partitionby =  ‘hour(ts_column)’

                                                          );

You can also setup Iceberg sync for any Postgres table.

ALTER TABLE my_postgres_table SET ( tigerlake.iceberg_sync = true);

```

Author: I had a look, and all of these examples are already in the page.

Reviewer: I don't see these examples on the page. I only see the bare syntax.

Reviewer 2: Let's add some examples, especially with regards to PG tables and partitioning. I'll accept the commit and polish these

## Limitations

* Only Postgres 17 is supported.
* Only the S3 Tables REST Iceberg catalog is supported.

> * Certain columnstore optimizations must be disabled in $HYPERTABLEs in order to collect correlating WAL events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Certain columnstore optimizations must be disabled in $HYPERTABLEs in order to collect deletes made to compressed data.
```

* The `TRUNCATE` statement is not supported, and will not truncate data in the corresponding Iceberg table.

> * The [tiered data](/use-timescale/latest/data-tiering/) of a $HYPERTABLE will not be synched.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The [tiered data](/use-timescale/latest/data-tiering/) of a $HYPERTABLE will not be synced.
```

> * The service must be restarted, to use Tiger Lake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Suggest removing this from limitations.

Author: Done

[cmc]: https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/
[aws-athena]: https://aws.amazon.com/athena/

> [duckdb]: https://duckdb.org/docs/stable/extensions/iceberg/amazon_s3_tables

Reviewer: Remove this link? I don't think we refer to duckdb here

Author: Done

---
title: Integrate data lakes with Tiger Cloud
excerpt: Unifies the Tiger Cloud operational architecture with data lake architectures. This enables real-time application building alongside efficient data pipeline management within a single system.
products: [cloud]
price_plans: [scale, enterprise]
keywords: [data lake, lakehouse, s3, iceberg]
---

import IntegrationPrereqsCloud from "versionContent/_partials/_integration-prereqs-cloud-only.mdx";

# Integrate data lakes with $CLOUD_LONG

$LAKE_LONG enables you to build real-time applications alongside efficient data pipeline management within a single 
system. $LAKE_LONG unifies the $CLOUD_LONG operational architecture with data lake architectures. 

This experimental release is a native integration enabling synchronization between $HYPERTABLEs and relational tables
running in $SERVICE_LONGs, and Iceberg tables running in [Amazon S3 Tables][s3-tables] in your AWS account. 

## Prerequisites

> <IntegrationPrereqsCloud/>

Reviewer 3: I think we need to update our prereqs to say "with the real-time analytics enabled" to match the new UI

## Integrate a data lake with your $SERVICE_LONG

To connect a $SERVICE_LONG to your data lake:

> <Tabs label="Install TimescaleDB">

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<Tabs label="Connect Tiger Cloud service to a data lake">
```

<Tab title="AWS Management Console">

<Procedure >

1. **Set the AWS region to host your table bucket**
   1. In [AWS CloudFormation][cmc], select the current AWS region at the top-right of the page.

>    1. Set it to the Region to create your table bucket in. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Set it to the region to create your table bucket in. 
```

>    **This must match the region your $SERVICE_LONG is running in**: if the regions do not match AWS charges you for 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   **This must match the region your $SERVICE_LONG is running in**: if the regions do not match, AWS charges you for 
```

   1. In `Configure stack options` check `I acknowledge that AWS CloudFormation might create IAM resources`, then 
      click `Next`.
   1. In `Review and create`, click `Submit`, then wait for the deployment to complete. 
      AWS deploys your stack and creates the S3 table bucket and IAM role.
   1. Click `Outputs`, then copy all four outputs.

1. **Connect your $SERVICE_SHORT to the data lake**

   1. In [$CONSOLE][services-portal], select the $SERVICE_SHORT you want to integrate with AWS S3 Tables, then click 
      `Connectors`.
   
   1. Select the Apache Iceberg connector and supply the:
      - ARN of the S3Table bucket
      - ARN of a role with permissions to write to the table bucket   

   Provisioning takes a couple of minutes, during this time the $SERVICE_SHORT is restarted.

</Procedure>

</Tab>

<Tab title="AWS CloudFormation CLI">

<Procedure >

1. **Create your CloudFormation stack** 

   Replace the following values in the command, then run it from the terminal:

   * `StackName`: the name for this CloudFormation stack
   * `BucketName`: the name of the S3 table bucket to create

>    * `ProjectID`: enter your $SERVICE_LONG [connection details][get-project-id] 

Reviewer 3: Project ID and service ID are combined in a single bullet in the first tab, think we can do the same here (or split there as well)

   * `ServiceID`: enter your $SERVICE_LONG [connection details][get-project-id]
   
   ```shell
   aws cloudformation create-stack \
    --capabilities CapabilityIAM \
    --template-url https://tigerlake.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/tigerlake-connect-cloudformation.yaml \
    --stack-name <StackName> \
    --parameters \
      ParameterKey=BucketName,ParameterValue="<BucketName>" \
      ParameterKey=ProjectID,ParameterValue="<ProjectID>" \
      ParameterKey=ServiceID,ParameterValue="<ServiceID>"
   ```

>   Setting up the integration through the Console in $CLOUD_LONG, provides a convenient copy-paste option with the 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Setting up the integration through $CONSOLE_LONG provides a convenient copy-paste option with the 
```

  placeholders populated.

1. **Connect your $SERVICE_SHORT to the data lake**

   1. In [$CONSOLE][services-portal], select the $SERVICE_SHORT you want to integrate with AWS S3 Tables, then click 
      `Connectors`.

   1. Select the Apache Iceberg connector and supply the:
      - ARN of the S3Table bucket
      - ARN of a role with permissions to write to the table bucket

   Provisioning takes a couple of minutes, during this time the $SERVICE_SHORT is restarted.

</Procedure>

</Tab>

<Tab title="Manual configuration">

<Procedure >

> 1. **Create a S3 Bucket** 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **Create aN S3 bucket** 
```

   1. Set the AWS region to host your table bucket
      1. In [Amazon S3 console][s3-console], select the current AWS region at the top-right of the page.

>       2. Set it to the Region to create your table bucket in.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      2. Set it to the region to create your table bucket in.
```

>       **This must match the region your $SERVICE_LONG is running in**: if the regions do not match AWS charges you for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      **This must match the region your $SERVICE_LONG is running in**: if the regions do not match, AWS charges you for
```

      cross-region data transfer.
   1. In the left navigation pane, click `Table buckets`, then click `Create table bucket`.
   1. Enter `Table bucket name`, then click `Create table bucket`. 
   1. Copy the `Amazon Resource Name (ARN)` for your table bucket.

1. **Create an ARN role**

>    1. In [IAM Dashboard][iam-dashboard], click `Roles` then click `Create role`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. In [IAM Dashboard][iam-dashboard], click `Roles` then click `Create role`.
```

>    1. In `Select trusted entity`, click `Custom trust policy`, replace the **Custom trust policy** code block with the 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. In `Select trusted entity`, click `Custom trust policy`, then replace the `Custom trust policy` code block with the 
```

      following: 
   
      ```json
      {
          "Version": "2012-10-17",
          "Statement": [
              {
                  "Effect": "Allow",
                  "Principal": {
                      "AWS": "arn:aws:iam::142548018081:root"
                  },
                  "Action": "sts:AssumeRole",
                  "Condition": {
                      "StringEquals": {
                          "sts:ExternalId": "<ProjectID>/<ServiceID>"
                      }
                  }
              }
          ]
      }
      ```
      
      `"Principal": { "AWS": "arn:aws:iam::123456789012:root" }` does not mean `root` access. This delegates 
        permissions to the entire AWS account, not just the root user.

>    1. Replace `<ProjectID>` and `<ServiceID>` with the the [connection details][get-project-id] for your $LAKE_LONG 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Replace `<ProjectID>` and `<ServiceID>` with the [connection details][get-project-id] for your $LAKE_LONG 
```

         $SERVICE_SHORT, then click `Next`.  

   1. In `Permissions policies`. click `Next`.
   1. In `Role details`, enter `Role name`, then click `Create role`.
   1. In `Roles`, select the role you just created, then click `Add Permissions` > `Create inline policy`.

>    1. Select `JSON` then replace the `Policy editor` code block with the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Select `JSON`, then replace the `Policy editor` code block with the following:
```

   1. Select the Apache Iceberg connector and supply the:
      - ARN of the S3Table bucket
      - ARN of a role with permissions to write to the table bucket

   Provisioning takes a couple of minutes, during this time the $SERVICE_SHORT is restarted.

</Procedure>

</Tab>

</Tabs>

## Stream data from your $SERVICE_LONG to your data lake

When you start streaming, all data in the table is synchronized to Iceberg. Records are imported in time order, from
oldest to youngest. The write throughput is approximately 40.000 records / second. For larger tables a full import can 
take some time.

For Iceberg to perform update or delete statements, your $HYPERTABLE or relational table must have a primary key. 
This includes composite primary keys.

To stream data from a $PG relational table, or a $HYPERTABLE in your $SERVICE_LONG to your data lake, run the following 
statement:

```sql
ALTER TABLE <table_name> SET (
  tigerlake.iceberg_sync = true | false,
  tigerlake.iceberg_partitionby = '<partition_specification>'
)
```

* `tigerlake.iceberg_sync`: `boolean`, set to `true` to start streaming, or `false` to stop the stream. A stream 
  **cannot** resume after being stopped. 

> * `tigerlake.iceberg_partitionby`: optional property to define a partition specification in Iceberg. By default the 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `tigerlake.iceberg_partitionby`: optional property to define a partition specification in Iceberg. By default 
```
